=== Reporting Bugs and Sending Feedback ===

All official releases of TaskJuggler are meant to be stable releases
unless explicitly noted differently. But our test suite is still very
small and some features are not tested at all. So it's very likely
that your current version of TaskJuggler contains some bugs. If you
find a bug, please follow this procedure:

* Read this manual to make sure that it is actually a bug and not a
feature.

* Check the [http://www.taskjuggler.org TaskJuggler web page] and the
[http://www.taskjuggler.org/forum.php discussion groups]. In
particular, you should check the
[http://groups.google.com/group/taskjuggler-bugs/topics existing bug
reports].

* Possibly the bug was already found and a patch or workaround exists.

* Try to create a test project that is as small as possible but still
reproduces the bug.

* If TaskJuggler has crashed you will usually get some debug output. This
may not make any sense to you but it is vital information to analyze
the bug. Please include it completely in your bug report. Use the
following command to store the messages into a file.

 tj3 yourproject.tjp 2> error_message

* Send the test project and a detailed description of the problem to
the TaskJuggler developers. If you are pretty confident, that you've
found a new bug, please post it to the
[http://groups.google.com/group/taskjuggler-bugs TaskJuggler Bug
Group]. If you aren't sure or want to provide patches or feedback,
please use the [http://groups.google.com/group/taskjuggler-dev
TaskJuggler Developer Group].

* When posting complete files, make sure you attach them. Don't paste
them into the body of the email. Some email servers and clients have
a habit of converting the body into HTML which will corrupt the file
contents. Unfortunately, the Google Groups web interface does not
support attachments. Please use a regular email program instead. The
posting addresses can be found on the above mentioned pages.

* Not attaching a test case will severely limit our abilities to help
you. Please make sure you provide meaningful descriptions and a small
but complete test project.  Not providing this information usually
triggers requests or leads to bug reports being ignored.

