=== Rich Text Attributes ===

TaskJuggler supports Rich Text data for some STRING attributes that
are marked accordingly in the syntax reference. Rich Text means, that
you can use certain markup symbols to structure the text into
sections, include headlines, bullet lists and the like. The following
sections describe the supported markup elements and how to use them.

The markup syntax is mostly compatible to the syntax used by the
popular [http://www.mediawiki.org MediaWiki].

==== Block Markups ====

All block markups are delimited by an empty line. The markup must
always start at the beginning of the first line of the block. Block
markups cannot be nested.

The simplest form of a block is a paragraph. It's a block of text
that is separated by empty lines from other blocks. There is no
markup needed to start a text block.

Headlines can be inserted by using ''''='''' characters to start a
line. There are 3 level of headlines.

 == Headline Level 1 ==
 === Headline Level 2 ===
 ==== Headline Level 3 ====

A line that starts with four dashes creates a horizontal line.

 ----

Items of a bullet list start with a star. The number of stars
determines the bullet list level of the item. Three levels are
supported. Bullet items may span multiple lines but cannot contain
paragraphs.

 * Bullet 1
 ** Bullet 2
 *** Bullet 3

Enumerated lists are formed by using a ''''#'''' instead of ''''*''''.

 # Enumeration Level 1
 ## Enumeration Level 2
 ### Enumeration Level 3

Sections of lines that start with a space character are interpreted
as pre-formatted text. The formatting will be preserved by using a
fixed-width font and by not interpreting any markup characters within
the text.

  Preformatted text start with
  a single space at the start of 
  each line.

==== In-Line Markups ====

In-line markups may occur within a text block. They don't have to
start at the start of the line.

 This is an ''italic'' word.
 This is a '''bold''' word.
 This is a ''''monospaced'''' word.
 This is a '''''italic and bold''''' word.

The monospace format is not part of the original MediaWiki markup, but
we found it useful to have for this manual.

Links to external documents are possible as well. In the first form,
the URL will appear in the readable text as well. In the second form,
the text after the URL will be visible but the link will be available
if the output format supports it.

 [http://www.taskjuggler.org]
 [http://www.taskjuggler.org The TaskJuggler Web Site]

For local references, the second form is available as well. In this
form, ''''.html'''' is appended to the first word in the reference to
create the URL.

 [[item]]
 [[item An item]]

In some situations, it is desirable to not interpret certain markup
sequences and reproduce the text verbatim. Such text must be enclosed
in nowiki tags.

 <nowiki> This is not '''bold''' text. </nowiki>

